Now when Rachel saw that she bore Jacob
Now when Rachel saw that she bore Jacob no children, Rachel envied her sister
no children, Rachel envied her sister
no children, Rachel envied her sister and said to Jacob, "Give me children, or
and said to Jacob, "Give me children, or
and said to Jacob, "Give me children, or else I die." And Jacob's anger was
else I die." And Jacob's anger was
else I die." And Jacob's anger was aroused against Rachel, "Am I in the
aroused against Rachel, "Am I in the
aroused against Rachel, "Am I in the place of God who has withheld from you
place of God who has withheld from you
place of God who has withheld from you the fruit of the womb? Here's
the fruit of the womb? Here's
the fruit of the womb? Here's my maid, Belha.
my maid, Belha.
my maid, Belha. Go into her, and she will bear a child
Go into her, and she will bear a child
Go into her, and she will bear a child on my knees, that I also may have
on my knees, that I also may have
on my knees, that I also may have children by her." Then she gave him
children by her." Then she gave him
children by her." Then she gave him Bilha, her maid, as wife, and Jacob went
Bilha, her maid, as wife, and Jacob went
Bilha, her maid, as wife, and Jacob went into her. And Bilha conceived and bore
into her. And Bilha conceived and bore
into her. And Bilha conceived and bore Jacob a son.
Jacob a son.
Jacob a son. Then Rachel said, "God has judged my
Then Rachel said, "God has judged my
Then Rachel said, "God has judged my case, and he has also heard my voice and
case, and he has also heard my voice and
case, and he has also heard my voice and given me a son."
given me a son."
given me a son." Therefore, she called his name Dan.
Therefore, she called his name Dan.
Therefore, she called his name Dan. And Rachel's made Bilha conceived again,
And Rachel's made Bilha conceived again,
And Rachel's made Bilha conceived again, and bore Jacob a second son. Then Rachel
and bore Jacob a second son. Then Rachel
and bore Jacob a second son. Then Rachel said, "With great wrestlings I have
said, "With great wrestlings I have
said, "With great wrestlings I have wrestled with my sister, and indeed I
wrestled with my sister, and indeed I
wrestled with my sister, and indeed I have prevailed."
have prevailed."
have prevailed." So she called his name Naphali.
When Leah saw that she had stopped
When Leah saw that she had stopped bearing, she took Zilpa, her maid, and
bearing, she took Zilpa, her maid, and
bearing, she took Zilpa, her maid, and gave her to Jacob as wife. And Leah's
gave her to Jacob as wife. And Leah's
gave her to Jacob as wife. And Leah's maid, Zilpa, bore Jacob a son. Then Leah
maid, Zilpa, bore Jacob a son. Then Leah
maid, Zilpa, bore Jacob a son. Then Leah said, "A troop comes." So she called his
said, "A troop comes." So she called his
said, "A troop comes." So she called his name Gad, and Leah's maid, Zilpa, bore
name Gad, and Leah's maid, Zilpa, bore
name Gad, and Leah's maid, Zilpa, bore Jacob a second son. I am happy for the
Jacob a second son. I am happy for the
Jacob a second son. I am happy for the daughters will call me blessed. So she
daughters will call me blessed. So she
daughters will call me blessed. So she called his name Asher.
called his name Asher.
called his name Asher. Now Reuben went in the days of wheat
Now Reuben went in the days of wheat
Now Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest and found mandrekes in the field
harvest and found mandrekes in the field
harvest and found mandrekes in the field and brought them to his mother Leah.
and brought them to his mother Leah.
and brought them to his mother Leah. Then Rachel said to Leah, "Please give
Then Rachel said to Leah, "Please give
Then Rachel said to Leah, "Please give me some of your son's mandrekes."
me some of your son's mandrekes."
me some of your son's mandrekes." Is it a small matter that you have taken
Is it a small matter that you have taken
Is it a small matter that you have taken away my husband? Would you take away my
away my husband? Would you take away my
away my husband? Would you take away my son's mandrekes also? Therefore, he will
son's mandrekes also? Therefore, he will
son's mandrekes also? Therefore, he will lie with you tonight for your son's
lie with you tonight for your son's
lie with you tonight for your son's mandrekes.
mandrekes.
mandrekes. When Jacob came out of the field in the
When Jacob came out of the field in the
When Jacob came out of the field in the evening, Leah went out to meet him. You
evening, Leah went out to meet him. You
evening, Leah went out to meet him. You must come into me, for I have surely
must come into me, for I have surely
must come into me, for I have surely hired you with my son's mandrekes.
hired you with my son's mandrekes.
hired you with my son's mandrekes. And he lay with her that night.
And he lay with her that night.
And he lay with her that night. And God listened to Leah, and she
And God listened to Leah, and she
And God listened to Leah, and she conceived and bore Jacob a fifth son.
conceived and bore Jacob a fifth son.
conceived and bore Jacob a fifth son. God has given me my wages because I have
God has given me my wages because I have
God has given me my wages because I have given my maid to my husband.
given my maid to my husband.
given my maid to my husband. So she called his name Issacha.
So she called his name Issacha.
So she called his name Issacha. Then Leah conceived again and bore Jacob
Then Leah conceived again and bore Jacob
Then Leah conceived again and bore Jacob a sixth son.
a sixth son.
a sixth son. God has endowed me with a good
God has endowed me with a good
God has endowed me with a good endowment. Now my husband will dwell
endowment. Now my husband will dwell
endowment. Now my husband will dwell with me because I have borne him six
with me because I have borne him six
with me because I have borne him six sons. So she called his name Zebulun.
sons. So she called his name Zebulun.
sons. So she called his name Zebulun. Afterward she bore a daughter and called
Afterward she bore a daughter and called
Afterward she bore a daughter and called her name Dina.
her name Dina.
her name Dina. Then God remembered Rachel and God
Then God remembered Rachel and God
Then God remembered Rachel and God listened to her and opened her womb and
listened to her and opened her womb and
listened to her and opened her womb and she conceived and bore a son.
she conceived and bore a son.
she conceived and bore a son. God has taken away my reproach. So she
God has taken away my reproach. So she
God has taken away my reproach. So she called his name Joseph.
called his name Joseph.
called his name Joseph. The Lord shall add to me another son.
The Lord shall add to me another son.
The Lord shall add to me another son. And it came to pass when Rachel had born
And it came to pass when Rachel had born
And it came to pass when Rachel had born Joseph that Jacob said to Laban,
Joseph that Jacob said to Laban,
Joseph that Jacob said to Laban, "Send me away that I may go to my own
"Send me away that I may go to my own
"Send me away that I may go to my own place and to my country. Give me my
place and to my country. Give me my
place and to my country. Give me my wives and my children for whom I have
wives and my children for whom I have
wives and my children for whom I have served you, and let me go, for you know
served you, and let me go, for you know
served you, and let me go, for you know my service, which I have done for you.
my service, which I have done for you.
my service, which I have done for you. Please stay if I have found favor in
Please stay if I have found favor in
Please stay if I have found favor in your eyes. For I have learned by
your eyes. For I have learned by
your eyes. For I have learned by experience that the Lord has blessed me
experience that the Lord has blessed me
experience that the Lord has blessed me for your sake. Name me your wages and I
for your sake. Name me your wages and I
for your sake. Name me your wages and I will give it.
will give it.
will give it. You know how I have served you and how
You know how I have served you and how
You know how I have served you and how your livestock has been with me. For
your livestock has been with me. For
your livestock has been with me. For what you had before I came was little,
what you had before I came was little,
what you had before I came was little, and it has increased to a great amount.
and it has increased to a great amount.
and it has increased to a great amount. The Lord has blessed you since my
The Lord has blessed you since my
The Lord has blessed you since my coming. And now, when shall I also
coming. And now, when shall I also
coming. And now, when shall I also provide for my own house? What shall I
provide for my own house? What shall I
provide for my own house? What shall I give you? You shall not give me
give you? You shall not give me
give you? You shall not give me anything. If you will do this thing for
anything. If you will do this thing for
anything. If you will do this thing for me, I will again feed and keep your
me, I will again feed and keep your
me, I will again feed and keep your flocks. Let me pass through all your
flocks. Let me pass through all your
flocks. Let me pass through all your flock today, removing from there all the
flock today, removing from there all the
flock today, removing from there all the speckled and spotted sheep, and all the
speckled and spotted sheep, and all the
speckled and spotted sheep, and all the brown ones among the lambs, and the
brown ones among the lambs, and the
brown ones among the lambs, and the spotted and speckled among the goats,
spotted and speckled among the goats,
spotted and speckled among the goats, and these shall be my wages. So my
and these shall be my wages. So my
and these shall be my wages. So my righteousness will answer for me in time
righteousness will answer for me in time
righteousness will answer for me in time to come when the subject of my wages
to come when the subject of my wages
to come when the subject of my wages comes before you. Everyone that is not
comes before you. Everyone that is not
comes before you. Everyone that is not speckled and spotted among the goats and
speckled and spotted among the goats and
speckled and spotted among the goats and brown among the lambs will be considered
brown among the lambs will be considered
brown among the lambs will be considered stolen if it is with me.
stolen if it is with me.
stolen if it is with me. Oh that it were according to your word.
Oh that it were according to your word.
Oh that it were according to your word. So he removed that day the male goats
So he removed that day the male goats
So he removed that day the male goats that were speckled and spotted. All the
that were speckled and spotted. All the
that were speckled and spotted. All the female goats that were speckled and
female goats that were speckled and
female goats that were speckled and spotted. every one that had some white
spotted. every one that had some white
spotted. every one that had some white in it and all the brown ones among the
in it and all the brown ones among the
in it and all the brown ones among the lambs and gave them into the hand of his
lambs and gave them into the hand of his
lambs and gave them into the hand of his sons.
sons.
sons. [Music]
[Music]
[Music] Then he put three days journey between
Then he put three days journey between
Then he put three days journey between himself and Jacob. And Jacob fed the
himself and Jacob. And Jacob fed the
himself and Jacob. And Jacob fed the rest of Laban's flocks.
rest of Laban's flocks.
rest of Laban's flocks. Now Jacob took for himself rods of green
Now Jacob took for himself rods of green
Now Jacob took for himself rods of green popppler and of the almond and chestnut
popppler and of the almond and chestnut
popppler and of the almond and chestnut trees,
trees,
trees, peeled white strips in them, and exposed
peeled white strips in them, and exposed
peeled white strips in them, and exposed the white which was in the rods.
And the rods which he had peeled, he set
And the rods which he had peeled, he set before the flocks in the gutters, in the
before the flocks in the gutters, in the
before the flocks in the gutters, in the watering troughs where the flocks came
watering troughs where the flocks came
watering troughs where the flocks came to drink, so that they should conceive
to drink, so that they should conceive
to drink, so that they should conceive when they came to drink.
when they came to drink.
when they came to drink. So the flocks conceived before the rods,
So the flocks conceived before the rods,
So the flocks conceived before the rods, and the flocks brought forth stre,
and the flocks brought forth stre,
and the flocks brought forth stre, speckled, and spotted.
speckled, and spotted.
speckled, and spotted. Then Jacob separated the lambs, and made
Then Jacob separated the lambs, and made
Then Jacob separated the lambs, and made the flocks face toward the stre and all
the flocks face toward the stre and all
the flocks face toward the stre and all the brown in the flock of Laban.
the brown in the flock of Laban.
the brown in the flock of Laban. But he put his own flocks by themselves,
But he put his own flocks by themselves,
But he put his own flocks by themselves, and did not put them with Laban's flock.
and did not put them with Laban's flock.
and did not put them with Laban's flock. And it came to pass whenever the
And it came to pass whenever the
And it came to pass whenever the stronger livestock conceived that Jacob
stronger livestock conceived that Jacob
stronger livestock conceived that Jacob placed the rods before the eyes of the
placed the rods before the eyes of the
placed the rods before the eyes of the livestock in the gutters that they might
livestock in the gutters that they might
livestock in the gutters that they might conceive among the rods.
conceive among the rods.
conceive among the rods. But when the flocks were feeble, he did
But when the flocks were feeble, he did
But when the flocks were feeble, he did not put them in. So the feebler were
not put them in. So the feebler were
not put them in. So the feebler were Labens and the stronger Jacobs.
Labens and the stronger Jacobs.
Labens and the stronger Jacobs. Thus the man became exceedingly
Thus the man became exceedingly
Thus the man became exceedingly prosperous and had large flocks, female
prosperous and had large flocks, female
prosperous and had large flocks, female and male servants, and camels and
and male servants, and camels and
and male servants, and camels and donkeys.